initial attempt at advanced vignette (#162)
insightsengineering/rbmi: vignettes/advanced.Rmd

# each patient with at least one missing value
dat_ice <- dat %>% 
    arrange(id, visit) %>% 
    filter(is.na(outcome)) %>% 
    group_by(id) %>% 
    slice(1) %>%
    ungroup() %>% 
    select(id, visit) %>% 
    mutate(strategy = "MAR")

# Define the names of key variables in our dataset using `set_vars()`
# Note that covariates argument can contain interactions
vars <- set_vars(
    outcome = "outcome",
    visit = "visit",
    subjid = "id",
    group = "group",
    covariates = c("age", "sex", "group*visit")
)

```

## Efficiently Changing Imputation Strategies

The `draws()` function is by far the most computationally intensive function in
rbmi. It is recognised that this can pose an issue for doing repeated analyses
using different imputation strategies. To try and address this issue `impute()`
has an additional argument `update_strategies` which allows the user to 
change each subjects imputation strategy without having to re-run the `draws()`
function.

Please note though that this functionality comes with a few key limitations:
- The visit on which the ICE occured can not be updated
- The imputation strategy cannot be changed from MAR to a non-MAR strategy if 

> there is any observed data after the ICE visit

Reviewer: little comment, I would end sentences with "."

Both of these restrictions exist to protect the validity of the imputation model.
It is worth noting that whilst a strategy of MAR cannot be changed to non-MAR, a
non-MAR strategy can be changed to MAR. The only potential issue with such a change
is that this means that the imputation model hasn't used all of the available data
and as such a warning is issued to the user to inform them of this. 

As an example, lets say in our first analysis we want to use the jump
to reference imputation strategy but then as a sensitivity we wanted to use

> the copy increments from reference strategy, this could be done as follows:

Author: Sure

```{r}

# create data_ice setting the imputation method to MAR for
# each patient with at least one missing value
dat_ice$strategy <- "JR"
dat_ice

drawObj <- draws(
    data = dat, 
    data_ice = dat_ice, 
    vars = vars, 
    method = method_condmean(n_samples = 15)
)

imputeObj_JR <- impute(
    drawObj,
    references = c("A" = "B", "B" = "B")
)
anaObj_JR <- analyse(
    imputeObj_JR, 
    vars = set_vars()
)
pool(anaObj_JR)

dat_ice_CIR <- dat_ice
dat_ice_CIR$strategy <- "CIR"

imputeObj_JR <- impute(
    drawObj, 
    references = c("A" = "B", "B" = "B"), 
    update_strategy = dat_ice_CIR
)
anaObj_JR <- analyse(
    imputeObj_JR, 
    vars = set_vars()
)
pool(anaObj_JR)
```

> 

Author: @nociale  I don't think I will do this as throwing a warning will cause the CICD to fail and means I need to add in a bunch of special meta programming to handle the warning

specified as using this `AVG` imputation strategy. Additionally the function then needs
to be provided to `impute()` via the `getStrategies()` function as shown below:

```{r}
dat_ice$strategy <- "AVG"
dat_ice

drawObj <- draws(
    data = dat, 
    data_ice = dat_ice, 
    vars = vars, 
    method = method_condmean(n_samples = 10)
)

imputeObj <- impute(
    drawObj, 
    references = c("A" = "B", "B" = "B"), 
    strategies = getStrategies(AVG = strategy_AVG)
)
```

## Custom Analysis Functions

By default rbmi will analyses the data by performing an ancova at each visit independently,
returning the "treatment effect" estimate as well as the corresponding least square means
for each group. If the user wants to perform a different analysis, or return different
statistics from the analysis, then this can be done by using a custom analysis function.

The rules for this custom analysis function are that it must take a `data.frame` as its 
first argument and must return a named `list` with each element itself being a `list` containing 
a single numeric element called `est` (or additionally `se` and `df` if you had originally specified

> `method_bayes()` or `method_approxbayes()`).  As an example lets say that for your analysis

Author: @nociale I re-worded this slightly but tried to include the explanation as you have it here

you are also interested in calculating the overall mean at each visit (i.e. not the treatment
effect), this could then be done as follows:

```{r}
mean_fun <- function(dat, ...) {

    mod <- dat %>% 
        group_by(visit) %>% 
        summarise(
            m = mean(outcome),
            se = sqrt(var(outcome) / n()),
            df = n() - 1
        )
    
    results <- mapply(
        function(x, y, z) list(est = x, se = y, df = z),
        mod$m,
        mod$se,
        mod$df,
        SIMPLIFY = FALSE
    )
    
    names(results) <- paste0("mean_", mod$visit)
    return(results)
}
```

This analysis function can then be used in combination with `analyse()` as follows:

```{r}
anlObj <- analyse(
    imputations = imputeObj,
    fun = mean_fun
)

pool(anlObj)
```

## Delta Adjustment

The `delta` argument of `analyse()` allows users to modify the outcome variable

> which can be utalised as part of a tipping point or sensitivity analysis. To do 

Author: Being British I reserve the right to keep it as "utilised" 😅

and `dlag` which allows the user to specify initial accumulative delta values based upon a
default value and a scaling coefficient based upon how far away the visit
in question is from the ICE visit. 

More specifically; the `delta` argument specifies the default amount of delta
that should be applied to each visit (if it was both post-ICE & unobserved), whilst
`dlag` specifies the scaling coefficient to be applied based upon the visits proximity
to the ICE visit. This is perhaps best illustrated with an example:

Let `delta = c(5,6,7,8)` and `dlag=c(1,2,3,4)` (i.e. assuming there are 4 visits) and lets 
say that the subject had an ICE on visit 2. The calculation would then be as follows:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 5   6   7   8  # delta assigned to each visit
 0   1   2   3  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 0   6  14  24  # delta * scaling
--------------
 0   6  20  44  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
```

That is to say the subject would have a delta offset of 0 applied for visit-1, 6 for 
visit-2, 20 for visit-3 and 44 for visit-4. As a comparison, lets say that the subject 

> instead had their ICE on visit 3, the calculation would then be as follows:

Author: My grammar is horrible but I think their just means "belongs to" in this case,  I.e. the ICE  belongs to the subject it is "their ICE"  

From Wiki:
> Singular they is the use in English of the pronoun they or its inflected or derivative forms, them, their, theirs, and themselves (or themself), as an epicene (gender-neutral) singular pronoun. It typically occurs with an unspecified antecedent, in sentences such as: "Somebody left their umbrella in the office.

I think its ok ?

 0   0   1   2  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 0   0   7  16  # delta * scaling
--------------
 0   0   7  23  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
 ```
 
In terms of practical usage, lets say that you wanted a delta of 5 to be used for all
post ICE visits regardless of their proximity to the ICE visit. This can be achieved
by setting `delta = c(5,5,5,5)` and `dlag = c(1,0,0,0)`. For example lets say a subject
had their ICE on visit-1, then the calculation would be as follows:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 5   5   5   5  # delta assigned to each visit
 1   0   0   0  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 5   0   0  0  # delta * scaling
--------------
 5   5   5  5  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
 ```
 
Another way of using these arguments is to set delta to be the difference in time 
between visits and dlag to be the amount of delta per unit of time. For example 
lets say that we have a visit on weeks 1, 5, 6 & 9 and that we want a delta of 3
to be applied for each week after an ICE. This can be achieved by setting 

> `delta = c(0,4,1,3)` (the difference in weeks between each visit) and `dlag = c(3, 3, 3, 3)`. 

Author: @nociale , Yerrr I went backwards and forwards on this a lot.  I think my final logic was that in reality from the information as written we don't know when the ICE actually occurred, could have been 1 week prior 2 weeks prior  etc. So when trying to define an delta offset by weeks it's complicated for the first visit. So I just made the naive visit that we assume the outcome is unbiased on the first ICE visit.  (I felt this was easier to explain / justify at least).

For example lets say we have a subject who had their ICE on week-5 (i.e. visit-2) then 
the calculation would be:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 0   4   1   3  # delta assigned to each visit
 0   0   3   3  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 0   0   3   9  # delta * scaling
--------------
 0   0   3  12  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
```

i.e. on week-6 (1 week after the ICE) they have a delta of 3 and on week-9 (4 weeks
after the ICE) they have a delta of 12

> 

Author: @nociale  with regards to  (2)  would you be ok with accepting the PR as is then adding this as  enhancements or do you think they should be added now prior to sending to mango ?

> 

Reviewer: @gowerc Sure, I can accept it. If I have time next week I will add something, otherwise we will add stuff after sending the package to Mango.

---
title: "rbmi Advanced Functionality"
output: rmarkdown::html_vignette
vignette: >
  %\VignetteIndexEntry{advanced}
  %\VignetteEngine{knitr::rmarkdown}
  %\VignetteEncoding{UTF-8}
---

```{r, include = FALSE}
knitr::opts_chunk$set(
    collapse = TRUE,
    comment = "#>"
)
```

## Introduction

The purpose of this vignette is to provide an overview of some of the more advanced
features of the `rbmi` package. 

In order to demonstrate these advanced functions we will first create a simulated dataset

> and perform a mock analysis so that all the require objects are available.

Author: ```suggestion
and perform a mock analysis so that all the required objects are available.
```

dat_ice <- dat %>%
    arrange(id, visit) %>%
    filter(is.na(outcome)) %>%
    group_by(id) %>%
    slice(1) %>%
    ungroup() %>%
    select(id, visit) %>%
    mutate(strategy = "MAR")

# Define the names of key variables in our dataset using `set_vars()`
# Note that covariates argument can contain interactions
vars <- set_vars(
    outcome = "outcome",
    visit = "visit",
    subjid = "id",
    group = "group",
    covariates = c("age", "sex", "group*visit")
)
```

## Efficiently Changing Imputation Strategies

The `draws()` function is by far the most computationally intensive function in `rbmi`. 
In some settings, it may be important to explore the impact of a different 
reference-based imputation strategy than the one chosen for the main analysis. 
This change in the imputation strategy does not affect the imputation model but it does 
affect the subsequent imputation step. 
In order to allow changes in the imputation strategy without having to re-run the 
`draws()` function, the function `impute()` has an additional argument `update_strategies`.  

Please note though that this functionality comes with a some key limitations:

> From a theoretical point of view, such updates are only sensible if the base imputation model and the data to which it is fitted is also applicable to the revised imputation strategy. For example, as described in the help to the `draws()` function, observed post-ICE data are included in the imputation model for the MAR strategy but excluded for non-MAR strategies. For this reason, the imputation strategy cannot be changed from MAR to a non-MAR strategy via argument `update_strategies` in case there are any observed data after the ICE. A change from a non-MAR to MAR triggers a warning because in this case the imputation model was not fitted to all relevant data and may be inefficient. Similarly, it is not possible to change the first visit which is affected by an ICE via argument `update_strategies`. 

Author: ```suggestion
From a theoretical point of view, such updates are only sensible if the base imputation model and the data to which it is fitted are also applicable to the revised imputation strategy. For example, as described in `help("draws", "rbmi")`, observed post-ICE data are included in the imputation model for the MAR strategy but excluded for non-MAR strategies. For this reason, the imputation strategy cannot be changed from MAR to a non-MAR strategy in the presence of observed data after the ICE. Likewise, a change from a non-MAR to MAR in the presence of observed data after the ICE triggers a warning because the imputation model was not fitted to all relevant data and may be inefficient. Similarly, it is not possible to change the first visit which is affected by an ICE via argument `update_strategies`. 
```

--------------
 0   0   7  23  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
 ```
 
If one alternatively wanted to apply a constant delta value of 5 to all visits affected by the ICE
regarrdless of their proximity to the first ICE visit, this could be achieved
by setting `delta = c(5,5,5,5)` and `dlag = c(1,0,0,0)`. For example lets say the first visit v1 
was already affected by the ICE for a subject. Then the calculation would be as follows:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 5   5   5   5  # delta assigned to each visit
 1   0   0   0  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 5   0   0  0  # delta * scaling
--------------
 5   5   5  5  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
 ```

!!! I tried to clean up the wording accordingly but ran into some problems. Please help to fix this! 

Another way of using these arguments is to set delta to be the difference in time 
between visits and dlag to be the amount of delta per unit of time. For example 
lets say that we have a visit on weeks 1, 5, 6 & 9 and that we want a delta of 3
to be applied for each week after an ICE. This can be achieved by setting 

> `delta = c(0,4,1,3)` (the difference in weeks between each visit) and `dlag = c(3, 3, 3, 3)`. 

Author: ```suggestion
`delta = c(0,4,1,3)` (the difference in weeks between each visit) and `dlag = c(3/2, 3, 3, 3)`. 
```

    vars = vars,
    method = method_approxbayes(n_sample=10)
)

impute_obj_CIR <- impute(
    draw_obj,
    references = c("A" = "B", "B" = "B")
)

ana_obj_CIR <- analyse(
    impute_obj_CIR,
    vars = set_vars()
)

pool(ana_obj_CIR)

## Now we re-use our draws samples but using the Jump to Reference 
## Imputation strategy

dat_ice_JR <- dat_ice
dat_ice_JR$strategy <- "JR"
dat_ice_JR

impute_obj_JR <- impute(
    draw_obj,
    references = c("A" = "B", "B" = "B"),
    update_strategy = dat_ice_JR
)

ana_obj_JR <- analyse(
    impute_obj_JR,
    vars = set_vars()
)

pool(ana_obj_JR)
```

# Custom Imputation Strategies

The following imputation strategies are implemented in `rbmi`:

- Missing at Random (MAR)
- Jump to Reference (JR)
- Copy Reference (CR)
- Copy Increments from Reference (CIR)
- Last Mean Carried Forward (LMCF)

In addition, `rbmi` allows the user to implement their own imputation strategy. 
To do this there are three things which the user needs to do:

1. Define their own imputation strategy function. 
2. Specify which patients use this strategy in the `data_ice` dataset provided to `draws()`.
3. Provide the imputation strategy function to `impute()`.

> The imputation strategy function must take 3 arguments (`pars_group`, `pars_ref`, and `index_mar`) and calculates the marginal mean trajectory and covariance matrix of a subject's marginal imputation distribution which will then be applied to subjects to which the strategy applies. 

Author: ```suggestion
The imputation strategy function must take 3 arguments (`pars_group`, `pars_ref`, and `index_mar`) and then calculate and return the marginal mean trajectory and covariance matrix of a subject's marginal imputation distribution. 
```

Here, `pars_group` contains the predicted mean trajectory (`pars_group$mu`, a numeric vector) and covariance matrix (`pars_group$sigma`) for a subject conditional on their assigned treatment group and covariates. `pars_ref` contains the corresponding mean trajectory and covariance matrix conditional on the reference group and the subject's covariates. `index_mar` is a logical vector which specifies for each visit whether the visit is unaffected by an ICE handled using reference-based methods or not. As an example, the user can check how the CIR strategy was implemented by looking at function `strategy_CIR()`.

```{r}
strategy_CIR
```

> To further illustrate this for a simple example, assume that a strategy is to be implemented according to which the marginal mean of the imputation distribution is equal to the marginal mean trajectory for the subject according to their assigned group and covariates up to the ICE and equal to the average of the visit-wise marginal means based on the subjects covariates and the assigned group or the reference group, respectively. For the covariance matrix of the marginal imputation distribution, the covariance matrix from the assigned group is taken. 

Author: ```suggestion
To further illustrate this for a simple example, assume that a strategy is to be implemented according to which the marginal mean of the imputation distribution is equal to the marginal mean trajectory for the subject according to their assigned group and covariates up to the ICE and then set equal to the average of the visit-wise marginal means based on their assigned group or reference group respectively. For the covariance matrix of the marginal imputation distribution, the covariance matrix from the assigned group is taken. 
```

```{r}
compare_prop_lastvisit <- function(data,...){
  
  fit <- summary(
    glm(
      I(outcome > 10) ~ group,
      family = binomial(),
      data = data[data[["visit"]] == "visit_3", ]
    )
  )
  
  res <- list(
    trt = list( 
      est = fit$coefficients["groupB", "Estimate"],
      se = fit$coefficients["groupB", "Std. Error"],
      df = Inf
    )
  )
  
  return(res)
}
```

The user should be aware that according to Rubin's rules, if the degrees of freedom from the complete-data analysis model is infinite, this does not imply that the pooled degrees of freedom is also infinite. It can be proven that in this case the pooled degrees of freedom is `(M-1)/lambda^2`, where `M` is the number of imputations and `lambda` is the fraction of missing information. Please see @Barnard1999 for details. If you want to force the pooled degrees of freedom to be `Inf`, please set `df = NA` as returned value from the analysis function.

This analysis function can then be used in combination with `analyse()` as follows:

```{r}
anl_obj <- analyse(
    imputations = impute_obj_CIR,

>     fun = compare_prop_lastvisit)

Author: ```suggestion
    fun = compare_prop_lastvisit
```

> 

Author: )

Reviewer: ```suggestion
)
```

pool(anl_obj)
```

# Delta Adjustment

The `delta` argument of `analyse()` allows users to modify the outcome variable
which can be utilised as part of a tipping point or sensitivity analysis. To do 
this, the user needs to provide a `data.frame` containing a column for the subject
and visit which identifies the observation to be adjusted, and then a 3rd column
called `delta` which specifies the value which will be added to the outcome prior to the analysis. 

The `delta_template()` function creates a skeleton `data.frame` containing
1 row per subject per visit with the value of delta set to 0 for all observations.

> The `delta_template()` function has two additional mandatory arguments `delta`

Author: ```suggestion
The `delta_template()` function has two additional optional arguments `delta`
```

in question is from the ICE visit. 

More specifically; the `delta` argument specifies the default amount of delta
that should be applied to each post-ICE visit, whilst
`dlag` specifies the scaling coefficient to be applied based upon the visits proximity
to first visit affected by the ICE. By default, the delta will only be added to unobserved (i.e. imputed) post-ICE 
outcomes but this can be changed by setting the optional argument `missing_only = FALSE`.

The usage of the `delta` and `dlag` arguments is best illustrated with a few examples:

Let `delta = c(5,6,7,8)` and `dlag=c(1,2,3,4)` (i.e. assuming there are 4 visits) and lets 
say that the subject's first visit affected by the ICE is visit 2. The calculation would then be as follows:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 5   6   7   8  # delta assigned to each visit
 0   1   2   3  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 0   6  14  24  # delta * scaling
--------------
 0   6  20  44  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
```

That is to say the subject would have a delta offset of 0 applied for visit v1, 6 for 

> visit v2, 20 for visit v3 and 44 for visit v4. As a comparison, lets say that the subject 

Author: ```suggestion
visit v2, 20 for visit v3 and 44 for visit v4. As a comparison, lets say that 
```

> instead that the subject's first visit affected by the ICE was visit 3. Then, would be as follows:

Author: ```suggestion
the subject's first visit affected by the ICE was visit 3. Then, would be as follows:
```

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 5   6   7   8  # delta assigned to each visit
 0   0   1   2  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 0   0   7  16  # delta * scaling
--------------
 0   0   7  23  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
 ```
 
If one alternatively wanted to apply a constant delta value of 5 to all visits affected by the ICE
regarrdless of their proximity to the first ICE visit, this could be achieved
by setting `delta = c(5,5,5,5)` and `dlag = c(1,0,0,0)`. For example lets say the first visit v1 
was already affected by the ICE for a subject. Then the calculation would be as follows:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 5   5   5   5  # delta assigned to each visit
 1   0   0   0  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE
--------------
 5   0   0  0  # delta * scaling
--------------
 5   5   5  5  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
 ```

!!! The example below used the wording "the ICE occurred at" but in data_ICE we only know the first visit affected by the ICE.

> !!! I tried to clean up the wording accordingly but ran into some problems. Please help to fix this! 

Author: ```suggestion
```

I think its ok now, which bits are you unsure of ?

Another way of using these arguments is to set delta to be the difference in time 
between visits and dlag to be the amount of delta per unit of time. For example 
lets say that we have a visit on weeks 1, 5, 6 & 9 and that we want a delta of 3
to be applied for each week after an ICE. This can be achieved by setting 
`delta = c(0,4,1,3)` (the difference in weeks between each visit) and `dlag = c(3, 3, 3, 3)`. 

> For example lets say we have a subject whose first visit affected by the ICE was week 5 (i.e. visit v2) then 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example lets say we have a subject whose first visit affected by the ICE was week 6 (i.e. visit v3) then 
```

> For example lets say we have a subject whose first visit affected by the ICE was week 5 (i.e. visit v2) then 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example lets say we have a subject who experiences an ICE between visit v1 and v2. Lets assume in particular that the ICE happens at half way between visit v1 and v2. Then the first fisit affected by the ICE would be visit v2 (i.e at week 5) and
```

Author: Only issue is that the dlag delta is a blanket rule applied to all subjects so the way this is written invokes the question of "but what if I know that subject A has theirs on week 2 but subject B has theirs on week 4"

the calculation would be:

```
v1  v2  v3  v4
--------------
 0   4   1   3  # delta assigned to each visit

>  0   0   3   3  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 0   3*1/2   3   3  # scaling starting from the first visit after the subjects ICE 
```

--------------

>  0   0   3   9  # delta * scaling

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 0   6   3   9  # delta * scaling
```

--------------
 0   0   3  12  # accumulative sum / delta to be applied to each visit
```

> i.e. on week-6 (1 week after the ICE) they have a delta of 3 and on week-9 (4 weeks

Reviewer: ```suggestion
i.e. on week-6 they have a delta of 3 and on week-9 (4 weeks
```
